From eluna@coil.com
Date: Wed, 16 Oct 1996 03:35:40 -0400 (EDT)
From: eluna <eluna@coil.com>
To: mwraves <mw-raves@taz.hyperreal.com>
Subject: yin/yang...um...

[a late reply...i'm pretending someone will care]

it's not a question of either/or, nor are the black & white halves of the 
yin/yang symbol "opposites" in any sense of the term.  i think that's a 
western corruption of the symbol which removes the subtlety of what it 
really represents.

western culture has always had this tendency to divide things into
dualities, into either/or's...good vs. evil, male vs. female, black vs. 
white, liberal vs. conservative, ad infinitum.  this has been a strong
current from the ancient greeks all the way to the 20th century
structuralists.  but the whole point of yin/yang, or at least the way i
have begun to understand it (and i am NO expert by any means), has more to
do with wholeness than opposition. 

yeah, you look at the symbol and it seems like a battle between two
opposite-colored swirls with elements of each other...but that's almost
like a cartoon reading.  it's not about forces fighting or even opposition
at all, what matters more is _the circle in which they exist_.

it really reminds me of john cage's decades-long attempt to understand
sound.  he grew up learning how to be a composer in the old sense, but
even early on, he knew he wanted to explore more than just melody and
harmony, which he thought was boring...so he went off and did mostly
percussion music to explore the nature of sounds themselves.  as opposed
to how most classical music is obsessed with the same ol' instruments and
structures, cage used just about anything he had laying around as an
instrument: flowerpots, turntables, buzzers, bells, junk...and so on.

the more he got into these experiments of "organizing sound," the more he
began to realize that music was just as much about the emptiness between
the notes as it was about the sounds.  this realization of the musicailty
of silence culminated in his "4'33"" piece from 1952 which is just 4 minutes 
and 33 seconds of a performer sitting in front of a closed piano! 

sounds like a joke, i know, but his intentions were dead serious.  he was
trying to get everyone to listen to the random sounds which are around us
all the time.  the problem with "4'33"" was that in a way, it became
impossible to make music afterwards.  i mean, if everything we hear is
music, then what's the point of making music?  cage's answer came from his
growing interest in buddhism and especially zen, so he began to say that
the role of the composer was to create sounds that could allow "divine
influences" to affect the listener. 

he later elaborated these views a little differently, and this is the 
point to which i have been building up through this entire post.

lemme quote james pritchett on this one, because his book on cage is the 
one that crystallized these thought for me:

"to summarize cage's model of composition: there exisits an infinite, 
completely _non-dual space of unique but interconnected sounds_; by means 
of chance techniques, the composer can empty [the] mind of thoughts about 
sounds, and thus identify with this infinite space." [emphasis mine]

this is some seriously deep shit.

my point is that in our culture, we really do tend to stick to the
paradigm of opposition: we either say something's good or bad, etc. the
real truth, as far as i have been able to see it, is much closer to the
way cage approached sound.  it's like an infinitely vast and complex array
of options, from which we get certain clues about things...but we'll never
really get to see the whole picture nor explore every option.  this is
much more complicated than just either/or, but it's also somehow
liberating (and to me, more satisfying). 

i wish i could follow up on these thoughts a little better, but
unfortunately the net is not the place for serious dialogue like this and
hell i've gone way too long already.  i will say that the road i took to
get to this point was a roundabout and haphazard, one which i wouldnt
recommend travelling in fact...but somehow i got here and i hope i can
build on what i've learned. 

i do have some concrete suggestions, though, especially with respect to
other cultural perspectives than our own (that's pretty much what prompted
me to reply to the spirituality thread at all). i dont want anyone out
there thinking that life is just about black vs. white or whatever, i feel
strongly that life is both more complex and more simple and unified than
that duality view would lead us to believe. 

other cultures, for example, have totally different concepts of time than 
we do, and a lot of what you or i might agree on would seem strange to 
them.  and that's just the beginning.

so i would recommend finding out about other cultures, whether they are in
your own town or thousands of miles away...if you make an attempt to learn
about them you'll cover a lot of ground in a hurry.  you dont have to go
far, either.  try riding the bus if you never have...sit at a cafe in a
strange part of town...read some recent anthropology books...or just 
observe people (and i mean really observe) and how they interact.  it can 
be very very revealing. 

a final suggestion: approach these other people and cultures with an empty
cup...as empty of pre-conceived notions as you possibly can be; or you
will get nowhere. 

good luck to everyone who is searching.  as many thinkers have suggested
in the past, perhaps it is that search in and of itself that is the most
meaningful. 

(okay i'm done now ;)
++
e d

ele-mental.coil.com/


