THE WEIRD LOVE MAKERS began in 1994 as an extension of another
collaborative effort, called the SEX MUSICIANS, which consisted of Jeff
Central and Andrew Isold of the influential 10-SPEED GUILLOTINE, along
with Greg Fernandez.  With the departure of Andrew, Mark Gunderson of the
Evolution Control Committe was selected as his replacement, and, inspired
by the name of a film mentioned in a "Something Weird" trailer, THE WEIRD
LOVE MAKERS was born, promulgating their unique mix of sexual innuendo,
cocktail-jacket lounginess, and whiskey-bottle mayhem, living up to
the promise of their oft-quoted sample: "they do EVERYTHING."

Tonight's performance marks the second re-appearance of the WLMs
after a long period of silence, and consists of some WLM standards, as
well as some new combobulations which can only be described as "divine."     

Jeff Central has been involved with electronic music since his early
experiments as INTERNATIONAL TERRORIST NETWORK in the very early 1980s,
moving into more dance-oriented realms in the late '80s with his 10-SPEED
GUILLOTINE collaboration with Andrew Isold, and finally to more abstract
and ambient tones of his latest work as CENTRAL INHABITANTS (featured at
the 3rd ele_ment concert event (Li): LITHIUM).  He also currently writes
for Cool & Strange Music Magazine. 

Greg Fernandez began his exploration of electronic and experimental music
around 1980, under the influence of the punk-dada band DEVO, the ------
ORCHID SPANGIAFORA, and another local experimenter, David Lewis.  Greg's
compositions often consisted of using cassettes and turntables in
extremely non-traditional ways, and (similar in form to Brian Eno and
David Byrne's important 1981 collaboration, My Life in the Bush of
Ghosts).  His live performances eventually developed into improvised DJ
sets using chipped 78s, old turntables, tape players, or whatever lo-fi
equipment he could cobble together, creating on-the-spot record loops and
using anything and everything as source material--an incredibly funny,
no-budget, lo-fi, mistake-ridden experimental free-for-all informed by the
older electronic musical ideas such as drop-in records, novelty electronic
music, and the more serious ideals of musique concrete. 

THE WEIRD LOVE MAKERS lifted Greg out of a long period of idleness, and
with his appearance at tonight's event marks the first time that his
ideas will be presented to

Mark Gunderson has been involved in the Columbus electronic music scene
for over a decade (yes, it's true) and his Evolution Control Committee has
consistently attempted to disrupt the integrity of our genetic makeup.
With side projects such as GAGA, the WLM, and many others, we can rest
assured that the future of genetic musical engineering will be in bad,
nay, terrible hands.  Thank goodness.
