MULTIPLE MEANING
TECHNO: AN ARTISTIC AND POLITICAL LABORATORY OF THE PRESENT
Michel Gaillot, 1998 [Translated from the French by Warren Niesluchowski]
. .

. .

From "Techno as a Political Laboratory of the Present :The Exhaustion of One-Way Meaning" (pp 17-28)

Enchantment in a Disenchanted World

From the moment of its birth in the clubs of the United States about ten years ago and throughout its expansion, first to Europe, and then all over the world--mainly through raves--it was clear that techno was above all a festive moment. It was if the fetes and partying it propagated throughout the Westernized zones of the planet brought out a desire to no longer be content with traditional or established forms of popular culture, or with the leisure and spectacle that constitute it. Yet, at least in the beginning, there was no thought of reformulating that culture or the social space through which it is transmitted and instituted. Techno displayed no interest in or claim to ideology, nor did it propose new meanings capable of renewing the configurations of contemporary community.

Unlike rock music, for example, the techno movement was not based on any political presuppositions. The absence of demand and commitment it is so often taken to task for--as if techno agreed to fade into the rules decreed by socio-economic decision-makers--does not mean it cannot be the core of a community, even a communion, however temporary and festive. If only because it has no words or text (the voice operates as pure sonority) [1], being purely instrumental or electronic, techno does not constitute a music that delivers or propounds a message. This puts it from the very start outside the political debate within which other forms of popular music like rock, punk, and now rap, have situated themselves.

It must then be asked whether this lack of position can be read or explained as a renunciation, or whether it is in fact a sign quite other, confronting us with an eminently timely process gestating new forms of existence. Suppose the social and political fundaments and normative ideas that have hitherto structured traditional figures of 'being-together' were in fact to reveal other possibilities for human living, both singular and collective? Here we are not claiming that techno in and of itself is capable of giving rise to these new forms of existence, only that it is in effect a sign of them. What's more, techno is without a doubt where the most concrete experimentation on a new reconfiguration of the world is being conducted.

We shall focus our attention on how techno constitutes this 'laboratory of the present,' bearing witness' to what is happening to our world and to the profound mutations that are redrawing its map, requiring the individuals populating it to define new enactments of existence.

This book takes on the challenge of showing how this movement has had a part in changing, yet remains part of, a world and the communicative modalities, singular and collective, that divide it, in one and the same process of reconfiguration. We attempt to weigh the consequences of this participation and elucidate them by basing ourselves on what is most distinctive about techno: first of all, its essentially festive nature, its lack of political position and commitment, relating to the exhaustion of all the great figures of 'one-way' Meaning [Sens unique, in French meaning both '(only) one Meaning' and 'one-way (street).'--Trans.]--God, Reason, History, Nature--or to what has been called 'the end of ideology.' Secondly, its relationship to contemporary technology, to machines, which derives from the willingness, even the need, to appropriate them, then divert them, making them from an instrument of isolation and reduction to identity into an instrument for bringing people closer together and for the free artistic and political expression of their singularity.

Its first principle of existence and creation is the 'mix,' a kind of metissage, the cross-breeding of various musical sounds that corresponds to the present-day metissage of various cultural and ethnic identities [as in the French and Canadian metis and Hispanic mestizo] which, like mixing, is made possible by new technologies, or to be more precise, in the processes of deterritorialization new technologies have intensified to the point that the world now tends more and more to the global.

Its stagings, neither figurative nor 'spectacular,' are in keeping with changes and recompositions in every art-form, musical, visual, and literary, most notably around issues of 'representation' versus 'participation,' and the questions arising from the replacement of the former by the latter--the disappearance of the work, the disparity between the places set aside for art and the fluid, ephemeral nature of their coming-into-being, the role of the artist, and the place of the spectator, among others. But whether or not techno is responding to this profound transformation of the world, or whether that makes it not just, or no longer, a mere extension of traditional popular culture, but rather an original and unprecedented form of being-in-the-world and being-in- the-body, does not mean it deliberately constitutes itself in response to these mutations, as if emanating from some avant-garde or revolutionary will to make history. It does in fact respond, or rather correspond, to a historical logic where is is not so much techno that makes contemporary history as the latter that produces and calls it forth, reveals it, and sets it in motion.

We may thus be tempted to venture that nothing is in a better position than raves to bear witness to what is happening in and to our time, our community, which now has to invent itself out of the collapse of the myths and ideologies that previously warranted coherence and permanence, and out of the technological development of a world whose boundaries are less and less marked or secured. Yet, without claiming any ideology or proposing any meaning or a new myth on which to stage a rally, techno nonetheless creates bonds of intimacy among the individuals who participate. But by doing so above and beyond existing accords and contracts, all the traditional forms of the 'theologico-political,' it may seem as if were bound for nothing. But there is no need to resemble, either by race or blood, in political or religious allegiance, in order to reassemble. This is the truth of techno and the festive it revives, opening up a space for sharing no longer based exclusively on the needs of the socio-economic and political order. In this regard, it presents itself as a return--if only an ephemeral one, since its time is the time of the festive--to a sharing and communication that no longer entail the separation and isolation of individuals. To the contrary, it grounds itself in a common existence; only there can they fully, completely exist, thus responding to the fundamental demands of their being.

The festive is born, so to speak, of the sacrifice of order and utility. It exists solely in order to exceed them, to remove the common ground on which they base themselves and organize their existence. What it gives rise to in its place is a relationship where single beings no longer need truth or authority of any kind in order to understand each other and be together. This also implies that an existence hemmed in by the limits of the social and the imperatives of daily life (work, consumption) would be devoid of all meaning or fulfillment if it were not able to temporarily exceed those limits, particularly through festive practices. Therein lies the polarizing and contagious power of techno, and this is what makes it so popular today, giving it the same capacity the festive has, indeed is, for intensively sharing existence. In this sense, when we are engaged or involved in it, we touch each other with nothing, and it may even be because we have 'nothing,' no meaning, no message to communicate or send, that we are able to touch each other. And all the more so, since, in this age deserted by the shades of old, whether divine or metaphysical, it alone seems capable of of opening up a communicative space to satisfy that imperious and unstoppable human demand for sharing and communion--at least of emotions--so constitutive of existence. As a result, each festivity, today each rave, replays the the relating and sharing while preventing it from being reified or petrified into something contractual or dissolving into a religious or political communion.

Being thus a resistance to anything that closes off the political, or that attempts a closure of being-together in its totality, the festive suggests, or perhaps may always have admitted, that there is nothing that can appropriate or take over the sharing, which it always overflows or exceeds. Indeed, this overflow is the only way to understand the agitation manifest and resonating in techno, the sight and sound of our world fracturing and trying to recompose itself in another form, in accordance with a set of relations no longer reposing on Idols or Ideals. Indeed, 'it all seems to happen as if the effervescence which controls the interior life of groups, the permanent revolution which endlessly modifies social structures and attempts to set up new ones. . . were concentrated in ecstatic ceremonies' whose present-day form is raves.[2]

This means that in sum the the festive bears witness to the mutations and transformations which have, either visibly or underground, upset the inertia of traditions, religions, and political systems that has enabled them to enfold themselves immutably cloistered in their identity. Should we not then see in the apolitical stance of this movement something other than blithe resignation or a renunciation of any willingness to change society? The apolitical may in this sense constitute an essential stratum, constitutive in turn of the social and the political. All things considered, far from being en 'archaic,' 'primitive,' 'irresponsible,' or 'dangerous' individual and collective behavior, as one sometimes reads, as if ravers were all marginal types incapable of meeting the demands and goals of our society, the techno movement poses, or rather recalls, the demand for another relationship of humanity to itself, and particularly to its body. Whatever one thinks of it, it constitutes a contemporary figuration (or configuration) of 'expenditure,' festive and transgressive practices, and more precisely in this respect, practices of the body. It is certainly no coincidence this new figuration of being-in-the-world and being-in-the-body has arisen through an apolitical musical movement whose rhythms set the body in action, even putting the dancing body into a trance. Thus, as Jean-Luc Nancy put it in Corpus, 'Our world happens to have deployed a rhythmic world-ness, one of jazz and rap and beyond, a press, profusion and congestion, a popular-ness of posture and position, with a electronic skin, zoned and massed (and massaged), of noise, one could even say, for there is indeed a background noise that grows when forms have neither soundness nor sense (social, common, sentimental, or metaphysical). Yes, noise: it's something like the verve, the underside of a thought, but also the rumble within the folds of the body.'[3]

This makes techno something more than a fashion phenomenon supposed to disappear as quickly as it appeared. This deserves our attention, for in becoming ever more marginalized, practices of expenditure and festivity themselves have difficulty resisting their subordination to the empire of thing and number. Also, when the festive becomes a thing to be consumed, its meaning, too, tends to be erased and disappear, engulfing with it nothing less that the totality of existence. Does this imply that existence is humanly possible only within the horizon-line of the festive? Definitely not. It's just that it begins only in laughter and shared feeling, with the sharing of nongoal-oriented practices, those not systematically governed only by the imperatives of work and rational accumulation. Unlike the productive working rhythms than mark time in the lives both of men and efficient machines, techno, and the festiveness in it, has not been subordinated to any outside goal or usefulness. It may indeed mean the suspension of those goals, momentarily interrupting the teleological logic humans assume in their productive activities.

The central meaning of techno is that human life cannot be wholly reduced to utility and servility, and it invites participants to sever the bonds of a life fettered to itself, with no other goal but optimal comfort. Because its festiveness provides in some fashion a space for the expenditure and transgression of our Western modernity, they may also also draw man back to his ancestral practices and customs, opening up a space to resonate with the echo of the bacchanalia and orgiastic delirium that have populated the margins of our history. Raves, which can be considered the Dionysia of modern times, may in this sense be as old as man himself. We should not forget that humans, alongside the laws and norms they have created and continue to create for themselves in order to construct their singular and collective existence, have always set aside, during festive periods, moments of transgression during which they exceed and upset the imperious order of clear and organizing consciousness, replacing it with the disorder of a deluge of the senses and common feeling.

Even if they no longer truly partake of the religious or sacred, raves bear witness to a resistance or recurrence of festiveness and 'expenditure,' as if man had always felt a need to discover and share zones of excess. Techno provides a opening for that expenditure and for the sacred, one that might seem in contradiction with its lack of political or religious commitment, although here the sacred has become something purely formal and remains only a shell. It proves, by providing an actual experience of it, that the sacred may vanish from social space without taking with it the demand for surpassing or exceeding oneself it necessarily involves. Here, too, as it was for Durkheim, the festive is the means through which society produces sacredness, and when it is envisioned and experienced within the horizon-line of techno, it expels or exhausts all mythological and socio-historical determinations, as if in the end only the fete, as sharing of non- and 'an-'economic existence, can henceforth be sacred. One can easily see that techno, despite bearing the the earmark as of our time--the exhaustion of political and religious forms--techno nonetheless bases itself on an appeal to communion, but a paradoxical one effected around a hollow or 'empty' kernel. Indeed, the communing, though grounded in shared, chorus-like enthusiasm, preserves of its meaning, or need for meaning, only the formal shell or envelope, as if the third term of the relationship were were, so to speak, 'empty' or 'hollow,' leaving only the simple fact of being together, in common, totally involved in the same event. Here the being-together exists only in the actuality of the dancing bodies, and is not based on any community of fact or appearance except the fete being shared at that moment. Techno adopts only the outward form of possession or mystical communion, as if it were in some sense a secularized and desacralized figure of it, where it is revealed to man that the sacred is not god, gods, or spirits who 'mount' or 'surmount' him, but the trance itself, the momentary but shared vanishing of consciousness into the moment. In other words, this makes the transcendent, in its many geo- and historico-political guises, into a pretext for the limited return to the pure immanence in which the world of consciousness dissolves into the present.

Yet this festive aspect, as Bataille clearly showed, is not necessarily fulfilled (except at the risk of leading to the 'worst catastrophes') in some reconstitution of an individual or collective 'sovereignty,' but only demonstrates the polymorphous and ineradicable need, at work in every culture and at all latitudes, to leave behind the world as reflected and ordered by consciousness and sink momentarily over the horizon and into the dark night of the moment.

But there is no access to the moment except in the suspension or  vanishment, itself limited, of the continuity of time, which underlies and structures the contractual social and rational order. This is certainly what is in play in the festivities of techno, to wit, the possibility, with no prior knowledge or teleology, neither watchword nor commandment, of self-abandon in the present, and of a sharing of that abandon as if it were the greatest gift. As soon as the moment becomes an opening up of existence to its aneconomic dimension, we can easily understand why our capitalist societies refuse, by their very essence, the possibility of self-abandon, obliging us to center--and decenter ourselves--on the project. Indeed, within the horizons of economic individualism--our individualism--the projecting, calculation, and forecasting of what is to come constitute the temporal modalities of being-in-the-world. Existence never abandons itself to itself, to its presence in the moment. It is always a tending towards, projecting. Man as such constructs his own humanity, but in opting for one lone and pure project, he renounces it, accepting the opaque visage of machine and number. Only the project has value, which, because it is 'the postponement of existence until later,'[5] means that existence has meaning only to the extent we renounce it. It is easy to see the principle of Christianity here, of which, in this regard, capitalism is a present-day secularized figure. Techno can, of course, only express its opposition to the fact that existence is ordained exclusively on this sacrifice of the present with a view to the future. As we shall see below, it uses it technics, not for the future, but for the moment, the time of existence, literally ek-sist-entia, 'standing outside or beside oneself,' ecstasy. If that goes back to other forms of music, like rock, for example, with techno one cannot help being struck by the primacy of the demand for a shared present, as if beyond and in it it were a whole epoch, ours, expressing an imperative not to give in to the future, some 'radiant future,' rather to be somehow caught up by and in the present, lived or experienced collectively. Here we can only refer generally to the work of Michell Maffesoli, and to the interview he has accorded us in the present volume. As is clear from his own analysis of various social phenomena, none of the many contemporary political and esthetic forms can be comprehended without what he calls an 'ethics of' or 'concern for the present' that distinguishes our time from modernity and its project, with its mode of being wholly tended towards the future, and in the name of which existence itself is to be sacrificed.[6] It is in 'the hollow left by the absence of project in its various forms that another manner of understanding and living life in society can find a niche.'[7]

Here we are confronted with a kind of intensification of the energy invested in daily life, all the greater since it is no longer tended toward attaining a goal or realizing some end. This does not mean, however, there is a generalized lack of interest in the future, but perhaps only that the future can no longer determine either the ordination or the subordination of our singular and collective existences as a whole. It is as if, in the midst of the exhaustion of all the ideologies and utopias of 'progress' and the concomitant multiplication of lesser and more ephemeral collective events, there was some resurgence of a communitarian wisdom of the shared moment, revealing the need to be- together around some 'nothing' (nothing ideological or religious, in any case). This means, then, that collective existence is not exhausted or depleted in the collapse of its projects and political figures, but infinitely exceeds or overruns the logic of its figuration or self-appropriation through the mediation of a 'full' or 'unique' kernel of meaning, whether mythological or ideological. In other words, what is finished or exhausted is not the collective, as we are endlessly told, but only its Western logic, namely the project of making the community into a work, an artwork to be executed according to some meaning, either given (divine transparence) or produced (the transparence of Reason or Progress).

The opening up of an existence which no longer recognizes truth anywhere but in the present, thus renders obsolete all the 'hinterworlds,' or other utopian worlds, that have until now governed and determined our collective behaviors, channeling them paroxysmally into the worst totalitarian catastrophes, Communist and Fascist, of the twentieth century. Or could it be that, conversely, it is the exhaustion of an Ideal to be attained which has now cleared some common time and space, where, in common, existence can be lived and shared in the present.

In either case, the demand for the present as an exhaustion of the ideological or utopian requires us (or invites, as the poet Friedrich Holderlin had it long ago) to 'turn the desire to leave this world for the other into a desire to leave some other world for this one.'[8]

There is indeed nothing further to produce, project or re-enact, which goes along with the interruption of the West as a search and demand for meaning. The fact that there is nothing more, nor a way out of the finitude of meaning, opens up existence to another space of sharing within which it is no longer possible to decently, if that is the word, await the return or coming of any god or other new myth. 'And if the absence were a sign, telling us that we should no longer dream of ways out but stand fast on this site, supposedly with no exit, and become familiar with it, rather than chase after the usual 'ways out.'[9] This is the question of our time, and it demands of us new ways of conducting our existences in common, in that double movement evoked earlier, of being open to the present and withdrawing from any enchanting future.

To the extent, then, that it incarnates or incorporates into itself the collapse of the great communitarian foundations, reposing only on a communion through music and dance, techno is akin to a kind of enchantment in a disenchanted world, an enchantment that in some sense is nothing more than experience shared in, through, and as the disappearance of all watchwords or ideologies. In some sense it's as if these foundations were losing their cohesive force, bringing about the disappearance of traditional social and political segmentations or partitions, and giving rise in the wake of their very exhaustion to the coming of a 'world-ness (if only a 'rhythmic' one), a worldness of bodies and being-in-the-body revealed in the rhythm of techno music. 'The systolic rhythm of techno revives the perspective of a historic mutation, or at least its vanishing point: its sought-after hypnotic effect fits in well with the new forms of rejecting and subverting the values of our society. Obsessive repetition as against sweetening through melody, hysterical muteness as against chatter; the importance accorded the voice as against the loss of meaning of words; the transmigrations of young people towards the the sites of our post-industrial society, abandoned factories, hangars and warehouses, as against the disenchantment of industrial society and the loss of public space.' [10]

Without in any way making it its theme or message, techno, in its loud silence, implies that the old socio-historic figures of meaning no longer make sense, and consequently can no longer fragment or partition the world according to an ethnic or political score that until now has divided it up into separate and opposed identities. The new music, eminently cosmopolitan, will be that of the commons of the world.



From "The Alliance of Dionysus and Prometheus' (pp 34 - 47)

In our world, and in an existence more and more permeated with technology, techno bears witness to the fact that machines do not prevent man from being himself; on the contrary, they are how he comes to exist, or more precisely, the by and in which he exists today. In the end, we must understand that 'he who refuses the final consequences of technics must also refuse the very first signs of it; but then it is man itself, in his freedom and coming-to-be, in his relationship to himself, that he will ultimately be refusing.' But what is most remarkable is how with cyberspace (CD-ROMS, digital video, and the Internet, for example) to which it is also related, techno takes over technics and appropriates it for non-technical and noneconomic ends. Beginning with, and within, the horizons of contemporary technology, it inaugurates new forms of sensibility and thought, of esthetic creation and interpretation. Already the esthetic originality of this music--that which is proper to it--could not have developed without the machines invented by contemporary technics. It is based on a principle of composition and performance which consists of 'making music with music,' as DJ Derrick May put it. In this sense, techno does not appear to be original creation, but rather a reappropriation and reconfiguration of various forms of already existing sounds, which it then joins, and mixes, transfiguring them into a new composition. This reappropriation and reconfiguration of the old, of pre-existing sound material, only found the right conditions for its existence with the appearance of new technologies (samplers, sequencers, synthesizers, and so on) that no longer require special training or technical skills to make music. Besides the fact that they allow one to put together an infinity of different musical forms, these machines, especially the sampler, shift the field of experimentation and creation from composition based on notes to one effected through recordings. The sampler which is a computer that can appropriate and transform any sound, is in one sense a completely new instrument, one that can only extend the domain of musical creativity, but which which also changes its form and requirements.[19]

Although it was really created little more than ten years ago, techno has become the most vernacular figure of electronic music. It goes back to the earlier work of Pierre Schaeffer and Pierre Henry, Terry Riley and Steve Reich, John Cage, but also to Kraftwerk. It is important to emphasize that unlike earlier electronic music, it is a music for dancing, a festive music intended not only for the mind, but, on the contrary, to engage existence in its totality (body and soul, one might say). Thus, although technics incontestably constitutes conditions for the possibility of techno, the latter only acquires it special coloration, its affective and emotional tonality, by appealing to another dimension, that of the body and its enthusiasms, as when it is engaged in dance. 'Technica' and Africa, one might say, are the two essential poles of techno. It is no coincidence that this music was first invented and played by American blacks, who breathed into it its more somatic and festive side.

But we do not have on one side work, reason, and technics, determining what is possible with machines, and, on the other, fete, sensibility, and the emotions--'natural,' 'authentic' existence, pure and free of any artifice. If only with its own machines, techno suspends this dichotomy, proving that art, fete, and technology are not necessarily and irremediably irreconcilable and incompatible. For this reason, and many others, it is no longer possible to belive that human existence and technics are separated by impermeable and intangible boundaries demarcating two antagonistic universes. Consequently, instead of seeing in the new technologies a simple continuation or consolidation of technics within human existence we can only passively accept, it seems to us, on the contrary, that we have been given a chance to reconquer and strengthen our freedom and autonomy in relation to all other political, technical and economic power. This is why our appropriation of these machines, in a world that is tending more and more towards globality, no doubt constitutes the most responsible attitude we can take. It is in this sense that the techno movement seems to us so exemplary, as if the demand for participation, to no longer be a mere spectator, were now driving the process of figuration and transformation of the world by these new technologies.

However, the contribution of machines to these festive and esthetic ends is itself only possible because technics and machines have themselves changed and are no longer the same. It is certainly no coincidence that techno developed in Detroit, in 1987 (and house a year earlier in Chicago), just at a time and place when a certain level of technics and equipment was reaching its end or a point of exhaustion, dragging down with it the world they had given rise to, and another era was beginning with the introduction of personal computers into many American homes. One only has to think of that city, one of the technological marvels of America, and now devastated by the collapse of the industrial world. Techno is in one sense an index of this change or mutation, itself possible only because contemporary technics is now deployed in new forms no longer solely based in the mechanical, but also, and especially, in the electronic and digital.

Just like the mechanical age of technics that preceded it, the electronic age will also open up a new world, modifying and recomposing it in its totality. This is also how 'burdensome machines, requiring great collective efforts to function, generally become a tool of repression wielded by the state. Bells. Galleys. Cannons. Tanks. But tools that can be owned and used on an individual scale inevitably bring with them democratic revolutions.'[20] In its mechanical and industrial form, technics was at the origin of the machines that replaced the physical energy of man, and of the animals he made use of, whereas in its present form, it installs a set of electronic machines that extend or enlarge the human brain and nervous system to the world in its globality. The primary benefit of these new technologies is that each of us is now in a position to appropriate and control them, so that henceforth machines, and technics in general, will no longer belong exclusively to the political and economic powers that be, and no longer depend on their authority and decisions. All such revolutions, it may be noted, have afforded people greater autonomy by allowing them to emancipate themselves, first from their material conditions of existence, and then from religious and political decision-making centers.

With the appearance of new technologies, in particular those having to do with communications, man and machine are no longer in conflict. As a consequence, the image of man being alienated by the machine disappears in favor of a much more positive one, that of a possible emancipation of existence, and of one's autonomy, through electronic communication. One only has to think of the Internet or the Web, for example. Because the stakes are so high and the implications so great--human freedom itself is in play--'info-poverty' is one of the major problems of our time. But in fact this has always been the case. But since today everything develops in accelerated fashion, to the point where the world is exposed to it in its globality, the problem calls for, even requires, a particular attention and responsibility, since it is all of humanity now being cast and put into play. But so as not to fall into a naive and hypocritical utopianism, we must not forget that although there is no emancipatory effect except through technology, the latter is real and effective only when it is shared and democratized; it can no longer remain a matter only for specialists or technicians. Since it is what makes man man, technics needs to be shared; those who would attempt to monopolize on it would thereby lay claim to a monopoly on humanity, depriving everyone else of it. Here we are concerned with the right to be oneself, by oneself, with the right to be an actor of one's own humanity. In this regard the interaction and interactivity between man and machine creates the possibility of no longer remaining a spectator, a receiver of information. This is all the more important now that, since McLuhan, we know how much those who select and control information determine the figuration of the world and of our existence, as well as of the event-horizon in which we take root and open ourselves to alterity. This underscores that we must not leave this control to political or economic powers, in other words that we need to transform vertical structures for transmitting informatiom into a horizontal network where each of us is equal before communication. Cyberspace offers man individual machines thanks to which he need no longer remain passive, and can become an actor in his own formation and information. On the world-scale of such mutations, which offer us the chance for a 'cosmopolitic' world (if we learn how to seize it) it is now time for us to accept that what we find so frightening about technics and machines comes only from our lack of being or essence, that is, from our finitude (whose particular technics is the prosthesis). It is further time to recognize in it the meaning we have always strived to find in some divine or spiritual figure. The rejection of the machine on the pretext that it is an instrument or weapon of capitalism is a puerile and dangerous behavior, tantamount to 'giving someone a stick to beat you with.' Let us on the contrary take hold of it, benefiting from the possibility being offered to us of appropriating the machine in order to recover our autonomy, diverting it to festive and artistic ends. Appropriating and diverting, through and of technology--these are the watchwords of techno, the means through which it makes itself into a popular culture of a technical kind, and, as we declared at the outset, through which it becomes an artistic and political laboratory of the present. We would be wrong to see in it only a marginal and insignificant consequence of technological development, for its constitutive principle makes it into nothing less than a total experience of existence in the conditions of life on earth in their present, and clearing new paths for the world of tomorrow (although that is not its specific goal here). It acts from an intuition that what is operative politically and esthetically in the present, especially with respect to the creation of singular and collective bodies, now lies essentially in the development of technics, no longer in ideological struggle.


Horizontalizing the World

Furthermore, it is neither accidental nor anodyne that the mixing and metissage of various musical forms and identities occurring in techno consists of echoes, on an esthetic level, the political metissage of ethnic and national identities, also entailed by or originating in technics, in the form of a technological coming-to-be of the world (or the coming-to-be- world of technology, tantamount to the same thing)[22]. In techno, the mixing of identities or different musical genres (Jazz, rock, disco, pop, reggae, rap, and classical music) is not only tolerated or accepted, but central; indeed, it defines the very foundation and principles of this music and its esthetics. Nor is it a coincidence that it has come to be a transcultural or transnational, even 'world,' form of popular music (in any case the most global form that has ever been invented).

It is hard to overstate how striking and significant the comparison between mixing, the creative principle of techno, and metissage, the process of opening up national and ethnic identities implied by the development of new communicative technologies actually is. Technics is in one sense a condition for the possibility of the metissage of musical forms and identities by which techno is defined, just as it is for ethnic and national ones which are redrawing the map of the world. It is by its very essence 'trans-ethnic,' as Bernard Stiegler has shown in his analysis of the work of Leroi-Gourhan. That is, it develops via 'networks' (of communications) throughout multiple human communities. As a consequence, and as part of the same process whereby it links and opens up those ethnic identities to each other, it is a simultaneous 'conquest and loss of territory,' and thus also swept along in 'an irresistible process of deterritorialization.' This process, set in motion by what he calls 'ethno-technic coming-into-being,' results, however, in 'a suspension of the ethnic differences themselves, at least of those differences that remain traditional, by which is meant rooted in a territory,' which gives rise to 'a confusion or melting of the ethnos into a mega-ethnos.'[23]

The mutations occurring in the present, which originated in the passage from a mechanical technics to electronic technology, accelerate and amplify this process of deterritorialization the uprooting of the ethnos from the territory through which it defines itself. Thus, 'with the new technologies, to the extent that they provide cultural models which are not, at least initially, rooted in the local context but are formed with a view to diffusion over the surface of the globe, we have a remarkable means of overcoming the obstacles set up by traditional cultures to the seizure, transit, and communication of information.' In other words, 'the new technologies are in the process of removing the hurdles presented by human life on earth.'[24] By multiplying communications networks over the face of the planet, these technologies, for the first time, give people in all their ethnic and geopolitical diversity, the possibility of pooling their memory in common and sharing, in electronic form, a common language or idiom. We are at the dawn of a new cosmology, about to enter what might be called 'techno-cosmology,' where the map of the world, its limits and borders, must all be redrawn, along with our ways of being together and sharing.

As technics becomes world, we realize that 'dwelling' in technics or 'welcoming' it, is nothing more than dwelling in and welcoming the finitude of meaning.[25] In the end, nothing but technics can come as surrogate to our lack of being. Instead of reinforcing the confinement and enclosure of identity, it pushes identities to open up and experience alterity increasingly by crossing the borders that have kept them enfolded within themselves. By accelerating to the level of globality, the forces of deterritorialization now put into play work toward the secularization of the collective in all its forms. From now on, these will tend more and more to slip through territories, 'crossing' them rather thart putting down roots, as if in the end the deterritorialization that technics implies were but the other side of metissage. One can easily understand why all nationalisms (like the National Fronts in various countries), all extremisms based on identity, are so radically opposed to such 'cross-breeding' and globalization. Their very survival is indeed at stake. We can also understand why our era has become the theater for a multiplicity of lesser communitarian forms resembling those we find in techno.

We are now embarking on a new age where this being-together will be played out, created and invented in a different fashion, according to a polarity determined not by belonging, but by elective choice. Indeed, if human relations or communications are no longer, or decreasingly, based on a received meaning heir, either by roots or belonging, to an identity or a territory, there remains only 'electiveness' as a modality for sharing non- or a-territorial, that is, transethnic or trans-national community.

The multiplication of communications networks throughout the world by the new technologies opens up, on the collective level, a horizon of new possibilities, other possibilities, within which alliances are being woven beyond the level of communities of fact and obligation. This leads to what might be called 'elective communities,' and implies that forms of being-together define their relations as elective singularities (according to taste, shared feeling, or friendship). This makes for the most open and free communities possible, non-prescriptive and non-coerced, where ethnic, racial, religious, and political determinations are 'mixed' and suspended, and where the transcendent and the immanent (the nation, race, blood, the Ideal) are no longer what grounds our being-in-common. What once was private (taste, feelings) becomes public and the ground for being-together, just as what was public, the ground of the transcendent and the social (the religious, racial, or ethnic) now tends to become private. This is how the foundations of being-together are also being transformed. No longer rigid, stable, universal, or eternal, it becomes fluctuating, mobile, nomadic, plural, and ephemeral. We then witness the the emergence of smaller communities based on extremely fluid ties, temporarily articulated around freely shared passions or feelings. They go back to what Bernard Stiegler calls 'idiomatic, non-territorial communities,' Michel Maffesoli calls 'tribes,' and Hakim Bey thinks of as 'TAZs (Temporary Autonomous Zones).'[26] We have thus entered an era of 'tribes,' networks, and small groups, and live in a time of ephemeral but effervescent gatherings that constitute 'the most accomplished mass expression of creativity.'[27] Today we cannot find a more revelatory example of this creativity--and of the metissage produce by today's technics--than techno. As a culture of mixing, it is a de facto and manifest sign of technical and aterritorial coming-into-being, and of the emergence within it of other collective workings. It bears witness to the dual movement affecting and transforming the world today, but shows that this movement, 'a constant back-and-forth established between growing massification and the development of micro-groups' does not in fact reduce 'world globalization' or metissage to some amorphous totality bringing everything back to the identical, the same. On the contrary, it creates an opening to the development of a multiplicity of singular differences.

Technics, itself a force of deterritorialization and metissage, in its contemporary form effects and provokes this mutation in our being-together, taking it from a belonging in fact (to a nation or a contract) to a polymorphous sociability that no longer recognizes itself in traditional forms of identity. In doing so, it mediates a transfer (or transport) from the religious and ideological to art, in the early Greek sense of techne, that is, basing it both on all the diversity of individual techniques and on all the arts. This in turn leads to a profound transformation in our relation to artistic practice. It is no longer subordinated to representation alone, but becomes, so to speak, a way of acting on and in the world, a way of experiencing it and inscribing ourselves in it, singly and collectively, outside any of the political and religious figurations that have fashioned it until now.

We also see how innovative and emblematic of the new attitude toward technics--heralding its capacity for free and creative expression of singularities--the relation of techno to these new technologies is. While it may be legitimate to question whether one can analyze a global situation--today's world in all its political, technical, and artistic dimensions--from the standpoint of one phenomenon, that of techno culture, it does seem that in many respects the latter, by its very constitution, festive and esthetic, is able bearing witness to all the structural upheavals bringing about the metamorphosis of our existential space. We may be in the presence of what sociologists, following Marcel Mauss, call a 'total fact.' thus, if only because it relates to an attempt at appropriating, then diverting, new technologies in order to create a new environment, no matter how ephemeral, in which to experience and share existence in new fashion, techno already bears witness to what constitutes the central issue of the present, both from the point of view of art as well as of politics. This is how the Internet, along with the new attitudes and relationships it presupposes, was born. Deleuze explains that 'it is easy to find a type of machine to correspond to each society, not because machines are determinant, but because they express social forms capable of engendering and using them.'[29] One recognizes in the new technological machines of cyberspace, the Internet and samplers in particular, a surprising desire not only to mix and cross-breed sources of information (sound, visuals, and text), but to make anyone into not just a receiver, but a transmitter and creator. This desire, concretized in new kinds of technical equipment and present in many forms of contemporary artistic practice, permeates in subterranean fashion the whole of the 'body social'--the 'world body'--transforming vertical structures of information and creation into horizontal ones. Thus, for the first time in human history (and this is what makes it a veritable cosmological revolution) the possibility presents itself for every single being to participate actively in the global and horizontal workings of the world. Without harboring any illusions about the 'global village' (which we know at bottom is only the hidden side of economic 'ultra- individualism,' camouflaged under the need for a good conscience on the part of planetary free-market democracy), it cannot be denied there is something like a seismic tremor, slow but spreading throughout the world, from the fissures of which new attitudes, both singular and collective, emerge, converging in the tendency to horizontality and metissage (with all the tensions of identity this may provoke) we have been describing.

Technics is deconstructing and reconstructing the space of the world in a dual movement. On one hand, its exponential development (through the ethnic-technics conflict and the concomitant process of deterritorialization we described earlier) has indeed abrogated the regime of Ideologies and is directing it to its 'end.' On the other, in this very abrogation technics itself emerges as the meaning of existence, an existence that no great figure of Meaning or Truth (Idols, Icons, or Ideologies) can shelter any longer from its lack of essence. Here, technics becomes confrontation, taking on an existence that is no longer sheltered, simulated, or at work. This does not mean there is no longer any work, but simply that that work--the work of technics, but also, and especially, that of art--is no longer representation of what shelters (Truth and all the various declensions of 'one-way' Meaning: God, Nature, Progress), but commitment and the acceptance of existence in the horizontal sharing of its lack of essence. The work of an out-of-work existence opens up a space for that sharing where art and the political can meet, not for fusion but for dialogue. As has long been obvious in techno, we realize that art is indeed not meant to be separate from the political, as if they designated two heterogeneous fields of operations. They are virtually welded to each other in collective articulations, flexible and ephemeral, that form around common sensations. As Nicholas Saunders put it in E for Ecstasy, techno is 'communism applied to the emotions.'[31]

Such a convergence of art (taken in the sense of art and technics) and the political does not, however, mean a mere estheticizing of the political (the community as artwork was also the project of fascism) nor even the politicizing of art (we have seen how social or critical art plays along with the power structure it denounces as much as those whom it serves). This may lead us to realize we should at least reflect on, perhaps even welcome, this correspondence between art and the political. But we need to craft an art which is no longer merely a representation of the Ideal, a technics whose finality does not reside exclusively in economic imperatives, and a political space not grounded in some Truth.[32] This constitutes a program that reposes on the possibility of inventing, singularly and collectively, an existence that no longer diverts from its own 'finitude' or from its free deployment within the horizons of the 'worldness,' cross-bred and deterritorialized, offered to us at present. With all due respect to the defenders of the purity of the Ideal, this may well be, for our time and those of 'us' that share it, both our task and our fate. We turn to art as we would to our most intimate capacity to maintain and establish ourselves in the absence of any theologico-political foundations. To its 'plastic force,' as Nietzsche[33] would say, as if that might be the only possibility for us to confront finite existence without taking refuge in the usual religious and ideological backwaters. When we refuse to have recourse to the whole panoply of utopian and idealist narcotics, we are much better able to take the exact measure of how much 'art is what happens to us (to us Occidentals) par excellence, what offers us our destiny or what disturbs our history.'[34] This may be indeed be the history of the event, or the advent, of art, and in it of a human existence restored to wholeness, so to speak, but of an art which would--or could--no longer be a 'service' to--or in the service of--either the Good, the Beautiful, or any other Ideal. Furthermore, the fact that art has henceforth discovered itself to be--following what Hegel imagined as the 'end of art'--that which has somehow come to occupy the vacant space left by the theologico- political, consequently coming closer to life (as is attested in various ways by so many of the practices of contemporary art) does not necessarily mean it has lost either its specificity or symbolic function, nor that it will likely melt or disappear into life or the everyday. It is not so certain that 'in order the preserve the freedom acquired in the modern age, contemporary art [should] once again mark its distance from the world; not, to be sure, in order to turn away from it, but in order not to melt into it, to fully assume its function as a symbolic putting-in- perspective.'[35] It may not be art melting and turning into the world, being somehow absorbed into the political. On the contrary, it may be the world and the political that is turning into art, broadening its range of operations and exploration far beyond its one 'function as a symbolic putting-in-perspective' and representation.

[1] There are indeed few if any vocals in this music. Furthermore, when they can be heard, they are mostly present as just another instrument, valued only for their musicality, to the point where sometimes one cannot even understand what they mean. When the voice is used, it is not, as m other forms of Western popular music, a support for discursivity or reflexivity, but rather for their suspension or suppression; it is not a vehicle or medium for messages at their service. It is almost as if techno were taking as far as it will go what Deleuze and Guattari say of music, namely that it is 'first of all a deterritorialization of the voice, which becomes less and less language.' See Gilles Deleuze et Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, Minneapolis, 1987.

[2] Jean Duvignaud, Le Don du rien, Paris, 1977

[3] Jean-Luc Nancy, Corpus, Paris, 1992.

[4] As Georges Bataille demonstrated, 'The endless problem posed by the impossibility of being human without being a thing, and of going beyond the limits of a thing without returning to animal slumber finds a limited solution in the fete, the festive.' In Theory of Religion, New York, 1992. For Bataille the fete is, along with eroticism, one of the privileged figures of 'expenditure,'through which man escapes the circle of utilitarian activities which inevitably drag him into a process of reification.

[5] Georges Bataille, The Inner Experience, New York, 1988.

[6] Michel Maffesoli, The Shadow of Dionysos: A Contribution to the Sociology of the Orgy, New York, 1993.

[7] 'Michel Maffesoli, Au creux des apparences: pour une ethique de l'esthetique, Paris, 1993.

[8] In Friedrich Holderlin, Oeuvres, Paris, 1967. 9 Martin Heidegger, Basic Concepts, Bloomington, 1993.

--
[19] This whole argument about esthetics and 'creation' assuredly deserves greater development and detail than the present context can provide, given the constraints within which a book such as this one is produced.  For more, we refer the reader to the proceedings of a colloquium at the art-space Confort Moderne in Poitiers, France, to the articles by Jean-Yves Loup in the revues Blocnotes and Crash, and, even though it concerns itself more with rap than with techno, to Richard Shusterman, Pragmatic Aesthetics: Living Beauty, Rethinking Art, Blackwell, 1992.  The latter is instructive, especially concerning the changes brought about by sampling, the creation of the new out of the old, mixing, and 'the challenge issued to the traditional ideal of originality and uniqueness' in art, bearning witness to the esthetic mutations concerning contemporary art, the artwork, and the artist.  From here we easily move on to the question of 'post-modernism,' that epoch characterized particularly by 'a tendency to recycling and appropriation of someone else's materials rather than originality; the eclectic mixing of styles; enthusiastic loyalty to new technology and mass culture; challenging modern notions of esthetic autonomy and artistic purity; an accent on temporal and spatial localization rather than on the universal and eternal.'

[20] Timothy Leary, quoted ibid.

[21] This is no doubt the best way to look at technics if we see it as something that closes in around our existences, like some imprisoning or enslaving power. It is then, as Deleuze and Guattari suggest, that 'the high-end technology for enslavement of the world-system is invoked. But even, or especially, this "machinic" enslavement is rife in undecidable motion and proposition. Far from requiring the knowledge of a sworn specialist, they provide weapons for becoming to everybody in the whole world.' Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus.

[22] This argument concerning the relation of mixing to metissage is developed at greater length and in more detail in my article 'Du mix au metissage. La techno comme desacralisation du monde,' published in an issue devoted to machines of the journal L'Animal, no.4, November 1997.

[23] Bernard Stiegler, La Programmatologie de Leroi-Gourhan, in Les Nouvelles de l'Archeologie, no.48-49,1992. 

[24] Jean-Francois Lyotard, The Inhuman: Reflections on Time, Palo Alto, 1992.

[25] Jean-Luc Nancy, Une Pensee finie.

[26] See Hakim Bey, op. cit.

[27] Michel Maffesoli, The Time of the Tribes: The Decline of Individualism in Mass Societies Sage, 1996. Based on the inversion of polarity between the public and the private that constitutes one of the great paradoxes of our time, Michel Maffesoli asserts that 'the social bond becomes an emotional one,' and that this '"emotionalism" is being affirmed more and more in all the tribes being established in our societies.' Maffesoli, in Au creux des apparences.

[28] Ibid. It may even be that this dual movement Mafessoli refers to here echoes, so to speak, the one I analyzed earlier (the withdrawal of the ideological and the utopian as against the opening up to the present). Indeed, 'world-ness' can only come about through such a withdrawal, which is at the same time the enclosure of human territories into closed and antagonistic figures, in the same way that the present-day development of 'micro-groups' proceeds from the rupture, or rather fragmentation, of the social in the shared present or moment.

[29] Gilles Deleuze, Claire Parnet, Dialogues, New York, 1989.

[30] As we have seen with the Internet and particularly the Web, the 'key is not in the technological level or novelty, but the openness or horizontality of the structure.' Hakim Bey, op. cit.

[31] Nicholas Saunders, Ecstasy: Dance, Trance and Transformation, Quick Trading, 1996.

[32] This commit us, as Hannah Arendt summoned us to long ago, to become 'aware of the nonpoltical, and virtually anti-political, nature of the truth.' The Crisis of the Republic, New York, 1972.

[33] See Friedrich Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy Out of the Spirit of Music/Or, Hellenism and Pessimism, Leipzig, 1872. Elsewhere Nietzsche says that 'we have art so as not to die of Truth.' 

[34] Jean-Luc Nancy, Une Pensee finie.

[35] Catherine Milled L'Art Contemporain, Paris, 1997.

