
From eluna@bronze.coil.com Tue Dec 30 19:25:29 1997
Date: Sun, 21 Jan 1996 10:38:24 -0500 (EST)
From: eluna <eluna@bronze.coil.com>
Subject: breakbeat descendants

THE WIRE, issue 138 aug 95 UK

Jungle, or drum 'n' bass as we are now being invited to call it in a 
classic revisionary move, is an optimistic force.  Via the complex 
processes of interaction between sampling and the breakbeat, it offers a 
strong but malleable musical chassis that can broadshoulder and dramatize 
a disparate set of inputs, from funk to HipHop to the futuristic 
overtures of Ambient.  But it's worth remembering that such a 
sophisticated state was only reached after a protracted and often hidden 
period of development.  

Drum 'n' bass's present popularity seems to stem from the fact that it 
has finally reconciled its diverse constituent elements--which for 
argument's sake we'll define as Techno, reggae, and HipHop--into smooth 
equilibrium.  Such a balance required an awkward period of experiment and 
invsetigation in which the contributing factions were emphasised or 
curtailed to taste.  If you listen to such mutant early 90s club culture 
fusions as Happy House, Hardcore, or breakbeat, you'll hear stillborn UK 
HipHop being reconstituted amid the frenetic beats of the post-Acid rave 
scene, and dubwise bass lines warming up the cold heart of Techno.  Play 
Shut Up and Dance's 1991 track "This Town Needs a Sheriff" and you'll 
hear subsonic bass empowering US rap; spin Third Party's 1992 "The 
Capsule" EP and you'll hear lovers' rock being electrified by nervous 
systems wired on Ecstacy.

4 Hero are as good an embodiment of this developmental process as you can 
hope to find.  They've been involved the UK dance music (a poor phrase 
admittedly, but a necessary flag of convenience) since the first 
scratches of of electronic music in the early 80s.  They've accelerated 
from producing bedroom HipHop to sculpting prototype models for 
electronic music's hybrid future.  Their recent output, including the 
groundbreaking 1994 album <i>Parallel Universe</i>--one of the first 
records to extend the drum 'n' bass template beyond the length of a 12" 
single--as well as assorted tracks such as "Bring You Down," and "Music 
is Music," their collaboration with Cold Mission, has a rarefied quality 
that stems in part from its sheer originality, its overwhelming 
distortion of convention.  

"I started off as a DJ," says Dego, who along with Mark Mac makes up the 
core of 4 Hero.  "I used to have a sound system called Midnight Lovers.  
I've done pirate radio, run dances, everything.  It was just being 
involved no matter which way you look at it.  Then we got to the stage 
where we started making music and bringing it out ourselves."

As with many other Jungle practitioners, their early forays into HipHop 
came up against a wall of indifference.  "All our friends used to do 
HipHop," he says, "and they'd be shopping their deals and they'd be 
shopping their deals forever.  No one wanted it.  It was a fucking waste 
of time as far as we saw it."

The pair moved into the bewildering subsectors of House and Techno.  "We 
were all into that Happy House shit," he recalls.  "We still are.  We've 
got one more EP coming out under the name Manix.  We've done the whole 
scene.  Those rave days with 10,000 people in a tent up and down the 
country, Newcastle, everywhere, all-dayers and shit."

The track that first brought them attention was "Mr. Kirk's Nightmare" in 
1990, an eerie, prophetic cut that looped a sinister announcement of the 
death of a son to his father.  "There used to be a lot of complaints 
about it," says Dego.  "People still refer to it to this day.  Even 
though we've had four dance number ones [including "Cookin' Up Your 
Brains" and "Journey from the Light"], it's always that one people talk 
about."

Between 1991 and 94, Dego and Mac recorded under a variety of names, 
including 4 Hero, Tek 9, Manix, Nu Era, and Tom & Jerry, a name which 
summed up succinctly drum 'n' bass's animated loony leanings.  With two 
additional partners, the duo established Reinforced Records.  Alongside 
labels like V, Moving Shadow and Suburban Base, Reinforced has been  
instrumental in incubating drum 'n' bass.  A sort of sonic laboratory 
crafted into the side of Dollis Hill tube station in North London, 
Reinforced has nurtured the careers of some of drum 'n' bass's brightest 
stars, including Nookie, Josh Wink, and the ubiquitous Goldie.

"When we do stuff, we want it out straight away so we put the records out 
ourselves," says Dego, echoing the Jungle tenet of self-determination.  
"We don't want to wait while some big company thinks about it.  Work, 
save up your money and just put your things out.  That's how Reinforced 
got going.

"If everybody had an independent mind then this thing wouldn't have 
started," he continues, referring to the strong infrastructure of the 
drum 'n' bass scene.  "That's how anything interesting starts.  People 
get their own buzz about themselves and the music and they go and put it 
out themselves.  But the same people who rejected these sounds a couple 
of years ago are involved now.  They all want a piece now."

This September will see the release of a record under the elliptical name 
Jacob's Optical Stairway, for the Belgian label R & S.  4 Hero is the 
duo's 'experimental' project, the point at which they atomize the 
rhythmic matrix of drum 'n' bass, while the recordings they release under 
other names play more to the crowd.  4 Hero tracks cut their programmed 
rounds of beats and loops with saxophones and flexed lines of guitars.  
On <i>Parallel Universe</i>, their contribution to the recent Virgin 
compilation <i>Macro Dub Infection</i>, or the various 4 Hero remakes of 
tracks by Scarface and A Guy Called Gerald, Dego and Mac spool their 
breakbeats through echo boxes and distortion effects, pushing drum 'n' 
bass through to another dimension--almost literally.

Unsurprisingly, Dego has difficulty naming any current acts he listens 
to.  "I hardly like any Jungle," he says. "Ten per cent is worth 
bothering with, the rest is nonsense.  I listen to Techno and HipHop."
