
From efron@hardcorps.org Thu Dec  3 07:45:24 1998
Date: Wed, 2 Dec 1998 18:25:10 -0600
From: Jenni Palmer <efron@hardcorps.org>
To: ele_ment@hotmail.com, tony@studiomotiv.com, blip1@juno.com,
    eluna@coil.com, cfnoel@freenet.columbus.oh.us
Subject: Massive 21 Interview

    [The following text is in the "iso-8859-1" character set]
    [Your display is set for the "US-ASCII" character set]
    [Some characters may be displayed incorrectly]


Okay I have the interview done so far with kev, Kevin Ginger and Tony...
This is due to Matt by Friday if you have any more to add or wanna make
changes please email me corrections. Thanks guys!!

Kev: I already have the snow*ball flyer scanned but none of the others.

Jenni
______________


At the heart of it all the ele_mentals in Columbus, Ohio have proved that
the artistic side of the scene is quite alive and just as entrancing as it
was 10 years ago. Many members have come and gone to bright careers, and
ele_mental has changed and grown over the years with the same basic ideals
as when they first came together. I talked with ele_members placebo, RAMos
and vAlence about what ele_mental is all about.

Massive : How did the ele_mental first come together?


.placebo. : Fresh outta high school, I came to Columbus and hooked up with
Titonton, Charles (monochrome), Todd (Sines), Tony and Ed Luna through a
mutual friend (Doug Holmes, a.k.a. doughboy). There wasn't much going on
around here other than seeing "Body Release" (Todd, Charles and Titonton's
band) play out at clubs and such. I don't remember there ever being a
definitive moment when we all decided "here we are, this is what we do, this
is why we do it.... We are ele_mental", but it developed by expressing ideas
and thoughts on what we would like to do, and how we could accomplish these
individual goals as one collective unit. This has proved to be one of the
most challenging things about doing what we do, given the diversity of each
member involved, and is getting more difficult with each one of us going in
our own direction.

RAMos : It kind got started around Body Release. Todd, T and Charles were in
the group; that's how I met them and Ed Luna. I first saw them at Felicity's
Bliss in Cleveland in '93. I had already met Charles a year or two before,
when we were both into industrial (!) Kevin Krahel (placebo) and Doug Holmes
showed up shortly after. We initially got together around an event Todd
wanted to put on, called ele_mental. It was to be a dance party, but more
open-ended: the flyer talked about merging art and technology in a more
general way.

vAlance : I wasn't there from the start. The party "elemental" was in 1992.
My first elemental party was Snowball (the second ele_mental event).
Snow*ball was $5 and had the best music I had heard. I kept going to every
ele_mental event I could, house parties and coffee shop stints aside from my
busy school schedule. It wasn't until I moved into (no longer) ele_mental
headquarters with Charles Noel (monochrome) and Ian Davis that, in 1995, I
really got involved. I helped with event coordination/promoting, got into
producing, then spinning.


Massive : What were the major obstacles you all faced when you first started
throwing parties?


.placebo. : There were many obstacles then, many of which we still struggle
with today. Outside of the usual problems with venues, finances, dates, etc.
We all have varied philosophies on just what a party should be. Some
questions we ask are "what kind of theme do we want for this party?" some of
us are more into the more experimental side, some the harder side, some the
abstract, jungle/drum&bass, house, whatever, and has really been challenging
to come up with a complete picture that leaves us all equally satisfied with
what we are doing. Sometimes the give and take puts a strain on things, but
we somehow work it out and are all content with the final outcome. We have
always been about having smaller, low key type events, focusing on the many
styles of music that are out there, and keeping on the straight and narrow
on the fact that it is all about the music, and nothing else. If there is
one thing that we all agree on, that's it.

RAMos : No place to play! We snuck into a parking garage at the OSU campus
to throw ele_mental. Todd put on Comfort under the pretense of an 'art
performance'; that's how we got to use a huge university warehouse. The next
party, snow*ball, was thrown in an old buggy works. The owners saw what we
were doing and said "hmmm...". The next year they renovated that part of the
building into a techno dance club.

vAlence : I wasn't there from the start, but when I did get involved, we
were always loosing money, trying to keep parties cheap enough w/quality
music (not just big names) didn't always bring the people we needed. It's
hard to expose people to something they haven't heard before and at the same
time draw them in by something familiar.



Massive : Does the Ohio scene live up to the standards that you place on it?


.placebo. : I really don't have any standards placed on Ohio as a whole, but
I think that Ohio has a lot to offer to people who go to parties for
whatever reason. There are promoters in it for the fame and money, some for
the drugs or whatever, and some like us, just truly want to put on a good
party, listen to good music and have as much fun as possible doing it. The
illuminators have had similar ideas, as well as poorboy in Detroit, but you
always have others doing it for their own reasons.

RAMos : Well, there are _some_ shady people. I don't go out of my way to
stop them from doing what they want to, though; let the audience vote with
their money. Most people in the scene in Ohio have their hearts in the right
place, though, doing it for the fun and spirit of the scene, not the money.
When I talk to people from Chicago, or Detroit or the coasts, they always
comment on how enthusiastic and real the people are here. Big-name Detroit
DJs who have been around the world say, "man, I wish it was like this back
home. I'd rather come down here and play for you!" Maybe it's because we are
centrally located; Ohio is like a melting pot for musical styles. We get
Chicago, Detroit, Windsor, Philly, and even Milwaukee influences.

vAlence : I don't know if I had put any standards on the scene. There's so
much diversity which is good, and segregation which is bad. Cliques were
forming, and elemental was one. Even though we didn't want to be segregated,
I think it was inevitable because nobody else had the visions ele_mental
has. We used to do events and people would come, and in time as things got
more commercialized and substance-abused I think the interest in ele_mental
faded. Bigger parties were always going on, it got real hard to compete even
though we were smaller, cheaper and had music and visuals that were more
creative (or at least different).



Massive : What are the major artistic and visionary ideals that ele_mental
have?


.placebo. : Diversity, expression, and equality. These are some of my own
ideals, and I would like to think that my cohorts hold some of the same
values that I do, but I cannot speak for all of them.

RAMos : I have always tried to get people thinking about how technology
influences culture, and how we can use technology to create culture
ourselves. I want people to be more aware of technology, and that they can
use it to create their own culture, not just consume somebody else's mass
culture. I want elemental events to be like a model for 'future living',
like being in someone's living room 20 years from now. Technology is an
integral part of the environment, but not necessarily the focus. It's put
there by humans, to communicate to other humans.

vAlence : The ideal of community. A chance for a collective of artists,
musicians, performers, and ANYONE else to collaborate ideas.



Massive : Do you find that the scene is still revolutionary or do you think
the ideals that ele_mental believe in don't have a direction to go now?


.placebo. : There is always a direction to go. The "scene" as a whole is
getting kinda formulaic, for me. There will always be things that haven't
been done at a party, and we try (for the most part) to bring in as many new
ideas as possible. Ed has organized a few events with these indie rocker
guys called "firexit" trying to bring some of them to our scene, as well as
exposing some of the party people to their side of the spectrum. Combining
music with visual art, video, interpretive dance, whatever... the
possibilities are limitless...

RAMos : Honestly, raves seem pretty cookie-cutter nowadays. They're made
according to formula. Maybe that's why the dance floor is only a part of our
events. We always want to combine it with things like live visuals, art
installations and live performance.

vAlence : I see the ideals of ele_mental apply to everyone and everywhere.
With many of us moving on to other projects and jobs (I recently to Oregon
for Grad School) I hope that the main collective in Columbus continues to
grow and evolve. I personally hope to continue with ele_mental out here, but
I am still getting settled.



Massive : Do any of you produce? Who, What style and what should people look
for in record stores?


.placebo. : Um... I'm just gonna let others speak for themselves on this,
but as for me, I produce hard Detroitish type techno, as well as some more
melodic experimental stuff, and the occasional house track. I have a track
out on trace elements 4 (21/22 corp.) as well as a long overdue e.p.
entitled "espianage" coming out on sonic mind records within the next few
months. My focus as of late has been on getting my own label "xeflex music"
up and running, and I hope to have the first release out by March. I hope to
bring the ele_ments of the melodic side of music and combine them with the
harder side of techno. [Shameless plug--- I am looking for artists, send me
a demo!!!]

vAlence : My alias, vAlence has a track on Trace Elements 4 on the
21/22corp. It's a minimal detroity techno track. I hope to work more along
the lines of more obscure and experimental in the future.



Massive : Kingsize (Subbase) and Todd Sines (Peacefrog) were a big part of
ele_mental years ago. Have you found that ele_mental has dealt well with
those people moving on to major techno labels?


.placebo. : Yeah, I think its great that they have done so well, I wish
nothing but the best for any and all that finds success in what they do. Its
not like they have become elitists or anything, they're still human just
like you and I. I can call up Todd, and talk about shit like I did back
then. There has never been any type of ego problem with any of the
ele_mentals, not that I have ever seen. We all know that if that would
happen, one of us would put him (or her) in check for it. I think that helps
us all keep it real, or whatever.


Massive : Monochrome and Titonton Duvante have made impressions on anyone
who has heard a tape or real audio file. Do you find that they amaze people
every time they play out?


.placebo. : Yeah, Titonton's got a following that's pretty impressive. I
think that we all have skills and abilities that are pretty tight, and I'm
the first to give props to anyone that has thrown it down. We all have a
kind of mutual respect and appreciation for what one another do.


Massive : What are some projects that ele_mental is currently working on?


.placebo. : Collectively, we have the 5th annual snow____ party planned for
late Feb./early March. Still planning, but watch for flyers. Ed has an
"active not passive" planned, but I'll let Ed handle that one.

RAMos : For my part, I have been taking the intelligent, listening techno
stuff I don't get to play at parties and spinning it in art galleries and
coffeehouses. I know a lot of people in the design and computer fields who
would like at least one or two of the different styles of "real" electronic
music, if only they got a chance to hear them. But they would hate a rave.
So I'm trying to bring the music to their environment, where they normally
hang out. We are even venturing into the mainstream a little bit. We have
been asked to play a slot in next year's Community Festival (Columbus'
annual indie/hippie rock fest). I'm not sure how the crowd will react to a
bunch of DJs onstage, but we may take them up on the offer. We definitely
won't change our format to suit the audience, though; you can count on that.

vAlence : Out here in Portland Oregon I am trying to still get settled in. I
want to get involved with these people who do a let of live PA's and
electronica experiment. I am also working on interactive sound sculpture and
installations. I finally got into Massive 20. The consumed party last May
sounded a lot like what I'm getting into.


Massive : I recall one of your parties where Titonton played with a string
quartet. It was one of the most amazing and creative things I have ever
witnessed at a party; does he still do that?


.placebo. : Yeah he still does, in fact he just did 2 weeks ago at navigate
here in Columbus. Live violins, vocalist, upright bass, oboe and drummer.
Pretty freakin' amazing. What else can I say?

vAlence : Yeah. He just did one in Columbus. I missed it. I really miss
those things. *sniff*


Massive : The layouts and graphics ele_mental uses for flyers and the
website are amazing, who does them?


.placebo. : Mostly Ed, but in the past they have been done by each of us.
From old skool house parties, to the full on events, we have all had a part
in the graphic representation in some way.

vAlence : Ed does most of it. Aaron Shinn (andromeda), Charles
Noel(monochrome), Chris Jones (gleek on Trace Elements1), and myself have
done some flyers and such.


Massive : Does the ele_mental have any future plans for any parties in the
near future?

vAlence : I think Kevin K. is heading a snow party...you guys need a dj? I
love to visit :)


Massive : Where can people get more information on ele_mental?

.placebo. : The web page--- www. ele_mental.coil.com and voice
mail-614.470.0929

vAlence : and my sculpture is linked from:
http://ele-mental.coil.com/who/kevinginger





---------
Kev: don't worry I am sending your demo address along too ;)

Thanks for everything. I hope to see you all when I come back to Ohio next
spring!!

Jenni



-----
Jennifer.Palmer::Austin,Texas::USA::Texas Raves Web Admin
Hyperreal.org/Texas Raves::juggler@hyperreal.org::hyperreal.org/raves/texas
Amen Preservation Society::jenni@hardcorps.org::jungle.hardcorps.org/efron
Hardcorps.org::efron@hardcorps.org::techno.hardcorps.org/
THUGS::thugs@hardcorps.org::gabber.hardcorps.org/thugs
Luminus::jenni@luminus.insync.net::luminus.insync.net/users/jenni
-----
Subscribe TXRaves Info::www.hyperreal.org/raves/texas/txraves.html
TXRaves Calendar::www.hyperreal.org/raves/texas/calendar.html (READ
DISCLAIMER)

