Growing up in "Motown" it was only a matter of time before Mike Grant pursued musical ventures.  His uncle was general manager of a nearby radio station, WKWM which played R&B/Dance.  Grant would often get promotional copies of new releases first which helped him get attention from other DJ's in Detroit's progressive music circuit.  Grant's popularity grew and in 1981, a competing DJ noticed this and suggested that Grant join his DJ group called Men of Music.  Grant's affiliation with Men of Music helped to school him on the in and outs of programming for a crowd.  Grant's mixing talents really improved when he met Blake Baxter in high school, the two often had after school sessions making mixed tapes.  It was through Baxter that Grant learned about the art of beat mixing.  Grant joined Baxter's DJ group, The Beat Sound Company and began doing mobile gigs throughout Detroit and Canada.
 
As Grant's popularity grew, a local promoter heard him at a party and helped him land a resident spot in one of Detroit's hottest clubs, Studio 54.  Studio 54’s rotating DJ line-up featured some of Detroit's best talent, including Ken Collier and Jeff Mills.  The promoter also helped land Grant guest spots on Detroit’s only video dance show WGPR TV’s “The Scene” which also featured Mills.  During his days at Studio 54, Grant met Eddie Fowlkes who introduced him to Derrick May and Juan Atkins and the three soon began working together.
 
During the summer of 85' May approached Grant with an opportunity to become a member of Detroit's first Hot Mix radio show; "Street Beat."  The show premiered Detroit Techno and featured its finest including May, Atkins, Mills, and later Kevin Saunderson.  Grant reached the pinnacle of his career as a DJ at the time. Unfortunately, yearning for travel and excitement Grant previously made a decision to join the military. 
 
While in the military, Grant maintained his skills by performing as a resident DJ at clubs on the base and in Seattle, introducing house and techno to the West Coast.  After his discharge, Grant returned to Detroit during the influx of techno to Europe before attending college in Chicago.  Upon graduation, Grant pursued a career in telecommunications, while occasionally returning to Detroit to perform at events such as Saunderson's "Journey Through The Hard-core" parties and Atkins’ Metroplex 10th anniversary party.
 
Grant is back on the scene and offering the world his talents.  He has guest residencies in Berlin at Tresor Club and in Detroit at Club 246 and The Hot Spot.  He is traveling to England, Germany, Italy, and Canada as a DJ.  He has released a collaboration as ‘Black Noise’ on Metroplex and is working on material for Tresor and other Detroit labels.