
From eluna@coil.com Wed Aug 20 03:37:13 1997
Date: Fri, 28 Feb 1997 02:33:54 -0500 (EST)
From: eluna <eluna@coil.com>
To: 313 mailing list <313@hyperreal.com>
Subject: (313) Techno for the masses (was: cliptrap)

On Thu, 27 Feb 1997, michael joseph taylor wrote:

>    What I am saying is this: it isnt so easy to pin down how culture 
> evolved. It isnt a black thing or a white thing, its a music thing. It 
> is the final work that matters, not what color the artists skin who 
> made it. If someone hands you a white lable, can you tell the race of 
> the person who made it? Is it really that important? 
> 
> nothing is as cut and dry as you might think, nobody is as pure as they 
> would like to think they are. Culture has this annoying habit of cross 
> fertilizing itself and breeding something new. 

at this point mike banks would probably remind us of the unifying force 
of Techno (capital T) as a global musical movement, one that smashes down 
the barriers between race/class/religion/gender/etc.  this, as everyone 
should know, is the true power of Techno music.

and as i said before, one need not earn an "urban pedigree" to claim this
music as one's own.  there is an entire spectrum of experiences that
define who people are; from the general classifications imposed by fate
and by society (race/class/religion/gender/etc), to the specific
experiences we have as individuals, that form us and take us one direction
or another...just as there is an entire spectrum of reasons for becoming
part of the Techno wave. 

my intention on this list is to make it clear that for some of us, there
is a real sense of urgency when we talk about this music.  our experiences
have led us to believe that "this is deadly serious shit" as mike would
say, and whenever the discussion steers away from that seriousness and
into more frivolous areas (trivia, ego-flatulence, gossip, irrelevance)
then it is time for a dose of cold hard reality. 

you don't have to be from detroit to understand what i'm saying, quite the
contrary.  yes, perhaps detroit does have its own unique take on all of
this, and perhaps an inordinate amount of bad shit does happen within its
city limits (call it "the humiliation of history" if you will), but no
matter where you are or what part of the social spectrum you fit into, you
_ought_ to understand that racism and sexism do exist, classes do collide,
people are bought and sold, power is abused, people are suffering
needlessly, and so on.  

i'm not trying to argue that it isn't _fun_ to chat about the new mills
white label, or sean deason's phat paycheck from K7! (hi sean! :), or the
lack of may releases, or kraftwerk's supposed new album...that's what this
list is supposed to be all about.  but unless we examine the wider issues
(like the ones i raised above) carefully and seriously, then we can do
nothing to change them. 

Techno, in its great diversity, is one of our best armaments in the effort
towards eliminating the distinctions that separate and isolate us.  it is
a weapon, and i choose to treat it as such, with great seriousness and
respect.  it's not just an art, a craft, a hobby, a collectible, or a
name-game; it's a fucking loaded gun, my friends... 

++
e d

ele-mental.coil.com/
