think(about it)

electronic music...it's all around us.  you may have already heard the unusual, throbbing tones tumbling out of radio speakers, stereos, and personal walkmans.  you may have noticed the tinny, repetitive twitters echoing through the caverns of shopping malls.  you may have downloaded strange sounds snippets or tapped into some raspy bitstreams off the internet.  you may have even realized that electronic sounds have infected nearly every form of entertainment and imaginary world we inhabit: from video games, to televison, to movies.  but listen more closely, and you may notice a loose, diverse grouping of familiar and unfamiliar forms that are changing some of the fundamental ways we experience music.

if you're reading this, you've probably already stumbled into this deeper current...through a friend, in a magazine, on the radio, on the net, or at your local record store, club, or underground party­whether you're just an occasional listener, net surfer, armchair appreciator, casual club-goer, dancer, or hardcore raver.  no matter what angle you approach it from, no matter what kind of music has formed you, there's probably something here that will make sense to you among the seemingly infinite subdivisions of this music.

but what do we call it?  is it 'electronica,' 'techno,' 'house,' or what?  and what do we really know about this music?  do we really know where the many styles (including techno, house, drum&bass, trip-hop, hardcore, ambient, noise, etc.) came from or how they developed?  do we even understand why we like this music at all?  is it the repetitive, trancelike beats?  is it the cool electronic sounds?  is it the lure of mind-altering substances that are often associated with the electronic music experience?  is it simply because it's the 'cool' thing to do now­a simple cultural code like the fashion, dances, attitudes, or rituals of any subculture?  what makes electronic dance music and its scenes (including raves/house parties/events/concerts/weeklies etc.) so special, if anything at all?

this article is not intended to answer all of these questions (there's no room for that!).  instead, this article can only throw you a lot of facts, names, and ideas, in the hope of encouraging you to make a few conclusions and connections of your own (don't be intimidated, check the end of this article to find out about the THINK(about it) compilation cassette and a few other pointers to help you figure out how to hear some of this music and read about its origins).  

we'll begin by describing the very broad categories of electronic dance (and dance-related) music, and then try to sort out the problems of finding a general name to describe it all.  we'll break down some of the biggest misconceptions about this music, placing it firmly within its own unique context, before checking off the most important moments of electronic dance music history.  we¹ll venture back into more general electronic and pop music movements, then delve ever deeper to older or parallel threads, cultures, ideas, movements, inventions, and people (from without or within the electronic and experimental tradition) who have brought us here.  we'll end by giving props to some of the contemporary composers and record labels who are pushing into new areas or re-exploring old ones in new ways.  as you'll see, there's a lot to say about this music, and even more to know...covering a lot more territory than you might 'think'...